Ayurveda for common cold:
Common Cold is relatively harmless condition. It can occur at any time throughout the year but the most common are in late winter and fall. It is most common in children.
This condition acts as a gateway to many other respiratory problems. It’s called the "common cold" because you may feel colder in this ailment, than any other type of illness. However, it should not be neglected.
Symptoms of common cold
Some of the common symptoms are listed below:
? Running or Blocked Nose.
? Sore/ Scratchy throat.
? Sneezing.
? Fatigue.
? Muscle Aches.
? Loss of Appetite.
? Cough.
? Headache.
? Mild fever with chills
Common remedies
? Leaves of holy basil (Tulsi) plant mixed with an equal quantity of dried ginger powder form an excellent substitute for tea during cold and flu. This may be taken by adding milk and sugar three times a day.
? Juice of ginger (Adrak) and holy basil (Tulsi) one-one tea spoon (5 ml.) mixed with one tea spoon (5 ml.) honey, to be taken two-three times a day.
? Powder of black pepper (marich) half tea spoon (2.5 ml.) mixed with jaggery (guda) two times a day.
? Small piece of Ginger (Adraka) fried in ghee, to be taken two times a day.
? One teaspoonful of the powder or paste of turmeric to a cup of milk or fried turmeric powder taken with 1-2 gm of ghee mixed with hot milk thrice a day. This gives immediate relief and help in early recovery.
? Gargle with warm turmeric powder 2-3 times a day to relieve sore throat.
? Drink a glass of hot water mixed with the juice of two lemons and sugar to taste. Take the same at bedtime as it gives relief from nasal catarrh.
? Two to three tea spoon (10-15 ml.) of fresh juice of Amla or half to one tea spoon (2.5-5 gm) powder of the same is ideal to control cold.
Prevention and Self-care
There are several ways in which you can keep the intensity of condition levels low.
? Inhale steam to relieve a stuffed nose. Add a few drops of eucalyptus oil in a bowl of hot water. Cover your head and the bowl with a towel for few minutes at a time. Be careful that the water is not so hot that the steam burns your face.
? Strengthen your immune system and keep yourself healthy. Two plants that will help you strengthen your immune system are Amla and Tulsi which may be used.
? Do not over heat the room. Let the body lose heat naturally.
? Keep away from others who are infected with cold.
? Eat a well balanced diet and get enough rest. Take plenty of hot beverages.
Care of New Born during coughs & colds to avoid Acute Respiratory Infections
? Sooth the throat and relieve cough with a home remedy such as lemon with honey, ginger, tulsi, warm water etc.
? Above mentioned remedies may be used in small doses.

- For sore throat Cough and other throat related problems its better to chew or munch few Betel Leaves Its peppy taste will definitely cure throat problems



Ayurveda for constipation:
1. Kabja/ Vibandha
2. Home Remedies
3. Diet consideration
Kabja/ Vibandha
There are several causes for constipation like
? habit of suppressing the urge over long periods
? absence or non-availability of articles habitually used before defecation, such as drinking coffee or tea
? habituated use of laxatives.
Home Remedies
? Triphala powder is very popularly used for this condition. It contains three drugs namely - Haritaki (Harada), Vibhitaki (Baheda) and Amalaki (Amla). 5gm of this powder (1 tea spoon) should be taken with luke warm water at bed time.
? The best to evacuate in chronic condition is castor oil. The castor oil used should be purified and diluted. The 4-6 tea spoon (20-30 ml.) of this oil is to be taken with warm milk.
? 1 Teaspoonful of Sana leaves (Sanay) in 1 cup of hot milk at bedtime is an easy method to relieve constipation.
Diet consideration
? Drink a glass of water early in the morning after washing the face and mouth.
? It is a better idea, if you can take a glass of warm milk at bedtime after adding a teaspoonful of ghee to it.
? Beans, dry grains, cabbage, mushrooms and other dry food should be avoided.
? Spices, which balance digestion- asafoetida (Hing), Ginger (Adraka), Cardamom (Elayachi) or Fennel (Saunf), should be taken with food to alleviate and promote the downward movement of gas.
? Try to avoid hot and spicy food and adequate fluids should be taken.
? Eat plenty of fruits and leafy vegetables as Papaya and sugarcane are very effective in relieving constipation.
? Use whole wheat flour and not refined flour.


Ayurveda for Hyperacidity:
Hyperacidity (Amlapitta)
Hyperacidity (Amlapitta) is one of the most common disease seen in the society. It is seen in all ages, all classes, and all community. Hyperacidity refers to a set of symptoms caused by an imbalance between the acid secreting mechanism of the stomach and proximal intestine and the protective mechanisms that ensure their safety. The stomach normally secretes acid that is essential in the digestive process. When there is excess production of acid in the stomach, it results in the condition known as acidity.
Causes
‘Hurry’, ‘Worry’, and ‘Curry’ are the three main reasons for the disease.
Diet (Ahara)
? Spicy food habits like eating samosa, burger, pizza, etc.
? Excessive use of chilly, Cinnamon, clove, mustard, garam masala powder (spice mixture), garlic etc. in diet
? Salty and sour foods like chips
? Eating of stale, fermented foods (dosa, uttappa, idli etc. bakery food items).
? Excessive intake of fast food
? Excessive intake of Oily foods, pickles
? Intake of food and beverages in its hot condition like soups
? Excessive intake of tea/coffee.
? Lesser intake of water, dry food
? Irregular meal times
? Repeated food intake (before the digestion of the previously taken food)
? Incompatible food like taking non-veg., pizza followed by milk shake.
? Skipping meals.
? Eating too late at night
Regimens (Vihara)
? Lack of rest, fast moving lifestyle.
? Insufficient sleep at night.
? Sleeping immediately after meals.
? Suppression of natural urges.
? Excessive exposure to sun and fire
Mental factors
? Stressful life style
? Excessive anxiety, worry, jealousy, anger, fear
? Job dissatisfaction
All the above factors result in excessive increase of ‘Pitta dosha’ in body and exhibits symptoms of amlapitta.
Signs and symptoms
? Heart &chest burn (retrosternal burning)
? Sour or bitter belching.
? Nausea
? Throat burn
? Regurgitation of food or sour substance
? Vomiting
? Gaseous distention of abdomen
? Heaviness in abdomen
? Indigestion.
? Aversion towards food.
? Pain in abdomen.
? Chest pain.
? Headache.
? Bad breathe.
? Foul smelling loose motions.
? Severe burning sensation over feet, hands
? Thirst
? Mouth ulcer
? Fatigue (especially in legs)
? Tiredness
? Fainting.
? Giddiness.
? Itching all over the body
Prevention
As the saying goes “Prevention is better than cure” it is better to avoid all the causative factors of acid-peptic disorder (amlapitta).
? Avoid excessive salty, oily, sour and spicy foods
? Avoid heavy and untimely food
? Avoid smoking and alcohol intake
? Food should consist mainly of bitters like bitter gourd, matured ash gourd
? Include barley, wheat, old rice and green gram in diet.
? Avoid overcooked, stale and contaminated food.
? The food must be properly cooked
? Follow mental relaxation techniques
Medical management
Line of treatment
? Avoid causative factors
? Palliative treatment - As the disease is of Pitta origin, all measures are undertaken to pacify pitta.
? Panchakarma treatment When patient cannot be well managed with oral medications ‘Panchakarma procedures’ like Vamana (emesis) or virechana (purgation) whichever is needed should be administered. In chronic cases Asthapanavasti (medicated enema) is indicated.
Some important single drugs useful in Amlapitta
? Shatavari - 3 gm twice a day with milk
? Yashtimadhu - 3 gm twice a day with milk
? Amalaki (Indian gooseberry) - 3 gm twice a day with water
? Sunthi (dry ginger) - 1- 3 gm twice a day with water
Domestic Remedies
? The Infusion of coriander seeds (Dhanyak) taken with sugar twice a day.
? Water obtained from green fruit of Coconut 100-500 ml to be taken twice a day.
? Powder of Amla 3-6 gm BD with water.
? Powder of Shatapuspa (Saunf) (Anethumsowa) with sugar mixed in a glass of water - 20 ml twice daily for 1 week or till the symptom subsides
? Chewing of half a teaspoon of fennel seeds after food
Do's and Don'ts
Do's (Pathya)
? Follow the meal times.
? Light food, Coconut water, articles having cooling properties
? Vegetables like white pumpkin, bitter gourd, matured ash gourd, leafy vegetables except Methi
? Wheat, old rice, barley, green gram, sugar candy, cucumber,
? Fruits like gooseberry, dry grapes, black grapes, sweet lime, pomegranate, fig, dry fig,
? Take adequate amount of fluids like pomogranate juice, lemon juice, amla juice, sweetlime juice, Medicated water with ushir (wala) or coriander seeds, or laja (puffed rice). Warm water.
? Dadimpak (sweet preparation made of pomegranate). Moramla (jam made from amla), gulkand (jam made from rose petals) with milk
? A cup of lukewarm milk after every two or three hours.
? One teaspoonful of ghee with warm milk
? Take adequate sleep & rest
? Practice Yoga, Pranayam, meditation & exercise regularly
Don’ts (Apathya)
? Avoid excessive spicy, sour and salty substances
? Avoid fried and junk food items
? Do not remain hungry. Avoid fast.
? Do not overeat, take small frequent meals
? Avoid untimely and irregular food habit
? Avoid foods containing excess amount of garlic, salt, oil, chillies,etc. very often.
? Avoid rice curd and sour fruits.
? Avoid lying down immediately after food and in supine position. The best recommended position is left lateral
? Avoid, smoking, alcohol, tea, coffee and aspirin type drugs.
? Avoid stress



Ayurveda for Bronchial Asthma:
1. Bronchial Asthma - Tamaka Swasa
2. Causes
3. Treatment modalities in Ayurveda
4. Specific Do’s and Don’ts
Bronchial Asthma - Tamaka Swasa
Difficulty in breathing or shortness of breath may be simply termed as Swasa (Asthma). It may be primary - originating from respiratory system, secondary - originating from other systems of the body but the impact is on respiratory system.
Bronchial Asthma is a chronic inflammatory disease of airway. It leads to recurrent episodes of wheezing, breathlessness, tightness of chest and cough particularly at night or early morning. As per Ayurveda, Swasa is mainly caused by the Vata and Kapha doshas. Swasa is broadly classified into five types in Mahaswasa (Dyspnoea major), Urdhawaswasa ( Expiratory Dyspnoea), Chinna swasa (Chyne- stroke respiration), Kshudra swasa ( Dyspnoea minor), Tamaka swasa (Bronchial Asthma).
Causes
As per Ayurveda the causes of Tamaka Swasa are as follows:
? Intake of dry, cold, heavy, incompatible food and irregular intake of food
? Excessive Intake of black gram, beans, sesame, meat of aquatic animals.
? Intake of cold water and exposure to cold climate
? Exposure to dust, smoke and wind
? Excessive exercise, over indulge in the sexual activity
? Trauma to throat, chest and vital organs.
? Suppression of natural urges.
Treatment modalities in Ayurveda
As per the Ayurveda Bronchial Asthma is Vatakaphaja disease, it begins in the stomach, progresses to the lungs and bronchi. Hence the aim of treatment is to move the excess Kapha back to stomach and then eliminate it. For this purpose following methods are adopted.
? Swedana (Sudation)
? Vamana (Therapeutic emesis)
? Virechana (Therapeutic purgation)
These procedures will be followed as per the need of individual patient. Practice of Pranayama, laxatives, light diet in the night and use of warm water will helps in the treatment of Asthma.
Specific Do’s and Don’ts
Do’s (Pathya)
? Godhuma (wheat), Old rice, Mudga (green gram), Kulattha (Horse gram), Yava (barley), Patola (snake gourd)
? Use of Garlic, Turmeric, Ginger, Black pepper
? Luke warm water, Goat milk, Honey
? Respiratory exercise, Pranayama, Yoga
Don’ts (Apathya)
? Heavy, cold diet, Masha (black gram), Deep fried items, Mustard leaves, Fish
? Exposure to Cold & Humid atmosphere
? Sweets, Chilled water, Stored food items, Curd
? Suppression of natural urges
? Excessive physical exertion
? Exposure to Smoke, Dust and fumes, Pollutants and Pollens

Ayurveda for Obesity:
1. Obesity (Sthaulya)
2. Causes
3. Symptoms
4. Line of treatment
5. Preventive measures
6. Do's and Don'ts
Obesity (Sthaulya)
Obesity is accumulation of excess fat in the body which may lead to negative effects on health, reduced life expectancy and/or increased health problems.
A major proportion of Diabetes, Ischemic Heart Disease, Hypertension, Ischemic Stroke, Osteoarthritis, and Cancer burden may be attributed to Overweight and Obesity.
In Ayurveda, Atisthaulya (Obesity) is described as excessive accumulation of Meda (fat/adipose tissue) and Mamsa (flesh/muscle tissue) leading to flabbiness of hips, abdomen, and breast. It is considered as one of Santarpanottha Vikaras (disease due to consumption of excessive calories) in Ayurveda. Medodushti (disorders of fat metabolism) may be one of the risk factors for Ischemic Heart Disease (IHD).
Causes
? Increased intake of energy-dense foods that are high in fat, carbohydrates
? Overeating and Irregular food habits
? Lack of Physical activities due to sedentary life style
? Genetics, endocrine disorders, Medical Reasons or Psychiatric illness
? Day - time sleeping
Symptoms
? Breathlessness even on little exertion / physical activity.
? Lack of interest in doing work.
? Profuse sweating with foul body odor.
? Excessive hunger.
? Feeling of tiredness.
? Excessive sleep
Line of treatment
(Under strict supervision of Registered Ayurvedic Physician)
Shamana (Palliative) treatment:
? Langhan (Fasting),
? Ama pachan (oral use of digestives to augment the fat metabolism),
? Ruksha Udwartan (Dry medicated powder massage),
? Heavy and non-nourishing diet/items like Honey, salad etc are advised.
? Physical exercises, mental work is also recommended.
Samshodhana Chikitsa (Purificatory procedures):
? Panchakarma
? Vaman (Therapeutic emesis),
? Virechan (Therapeutic purgation),
? Lekhan vasti (Medicated enema) are advised for the management of Sthaulya.
? Single drugs: Guduchi, Vidanga, Musta, Sunthi, Amla, Vaca, Daruharidra, Guggulu, etc.
? Compound Formulations: Trikatu, Navak Guggulu, Triphala Guggulu, Vidangadi Churna, Takrarishta, Navayasa lauha, Arogya Vardhini Vati etc.
Preventive measures
Unhealthy diet results in building up of adipose tissue in the body resulting in weight gain and obesity. Physical activity lessens the energy imbalance between calories consumed on one hand, calories expended on the other hand resulting in weight gain and obesity. Hence, intake of healthy diet comprising of sufficient fibre, adopting active life style and practicing Yoga and Meditation to manage stress and fatigue are highly recommended for the prevention of Overweight / Obesity.
Life Style modifications such as
? Mild to Moderate exercise according to individual capacity.
? Regular habit of Brisk morning walk for 30 minutes.
? Avoid sedentary habits.
? Avoid excessive sleep.
? Avoid watching TV while having food.
? Avoid Alcohol and Smoking
Do's and Don'ts
Do's
? Take low-fat and low-calorie food items.
? Take more proteins to stay longer without food.
? Steamed/ boiled and baked vegetables rather than fried.
? Take frequent small meals to avoid food cravings.
? Drink skimmed milk instead of whole milk.
? Take Healthy foods such as – oatmeal, walnuts, salads, bitter gourd (Karela), drumstick (Shigru), barley (Yava ), wheat, Green gram (Moong dal), honey (Madhu), Indian Gooseberry (Amla), pomegranate (Anar) and snake gourd etc and skimmed Buttermilk.
? Include cabbage in daily meal. It will stop the conversion of sugars to fat.
? Use warm water for drinking.
? Include lemon in diet and drinks.
Dont’s
? High carbohydrate vegetables like - potato, rice etc.
? More sugary or sweet products, more dairy products, fried and oily foods, fast foods, excess salt.
? Salty foods or excessive salt in meals.






Ayurvedic tips to treat dry cough:
1. Symptoms
2. Causes
3. How Ayurvedic Treats Dry Cough?
4. Ayurvedic home remedies for dry cough
5. Ayurvedic treatment approach for dry cough
Dry cough (Shushka-Kasa) is a very common ailment nowadays, especially in cities. The allergens or pollutants in the environment enter your throat pipe, lungs or airways and trigger your body to cough them out! This continued action (natural reflex) causes inflammation of the respiratory tract and throat. Dry cough can last for a very long time, even become chronic.
Symptoms
A person suffering from this disease displays the following symptoms:
? Frequent dry cough
? Phlegm/sputum production
? Burning sensation or suffocation in the chest
? Fever
? Pain in the region of heart, temples, head, abdomen, sides
? Irritability
? Dryness in the mouth, excessive thirst, bitter taste
? Sore throat, hoarseness of voice
? Difficulty in swallowing food
? Tiredness, weakness
? Nausea after eating food.
Causes
The main causes of dry cough are respiratory tract infections, Sinusitis, Pneumonia, suppression of vomiting and inflammation due to irritants/allergens. The last reason is the most common one!
When dry coughs are provoked by prolonged exposure to high pollution-levels, dust, allergy and toxic smoke (like cigarettes) it is known as 'Vataja Kasa’ in Ayurveda.
To shield from this disease, your respiratory system must have a strong immunity but with poor nutrition, irregular lifestyle and growing environmental toxicity, it is hard for your body to fight back.
How Ayurvedic Treats Dry Cough?
Prana Vayu and Udana Vayu (types of Vata) govern the respiratory system. When allergens, viruses, and bacteria vitiate them, irritation occurs. As a countermeasure, the body forcibly expels air to remove the obstruction. During this process, the Vata (biological air) balance in the body gets impaired and causes “Vataja Kasa”.
Ayurvedic home remedies for dry cough
If you are suffering from Dry cough, try out these effective Ayurvedic home remedies:
? Before bedtime, take warm milk with turmeric and honey. This works as a natural antibiotic.
? Consume turmeric powder mixed with honey three times a day.
? Licorice (Mulethi) lozenges to reduce inflammation.
? Use the decoction of Sauf (Ani seeds) as the base water to make coffee or tea.
? Sooth your infected throat pipe with natural cough syrup made by mixing ginger and honey. Boil a piece of ginger (peeled) in water. Filter and mix 1 tsp of honey and consume. You can even chew small pieces of ginger sprinkled with water for its anti-inflammatory properties
? Add a pinch of cinnamon powder in warm water or tea for relief from throat irritability
? Drink tea made of Tulsi (Basil leaves), ginger and honey
? You can chew Tulsi leaves throughout the day for faster recovery
Don’t forget to make some important lifestyle changes like:
? Avoid interaction with allergens (pollution, dust, pollen etc.)
? Abstain from junk, dry or spicy food
? A nourishing diet should be taken in small quantities (preferably as soups) until the digestive Agni becomes strong
? Have plenty of rest
? Consume clean, room temperature/warm water
? Do Pranayama for building lung’s health
? Avoid irritants like smoke from mosquito coils, incense etc
? Follow strict food and sleep schedule. Have dinner before sunset
? Install humidifier in the bedroom
? Consume food rich in Vitamin C to strengthen the immune system
Ayurvedic treatment approach for dry cough
Apart from these home remedies, the Vaids prescribe medicinal preparations depending on patients’ dosha composition (Vata-Pitta-Kapha balance) and disease symptoms. Today, Ayurveda has advanced medicines for curing related ailments like irritable dry cough, chronic fever, throat infection and respiratory diseases. For example: Draksharishta, Vaikrantabaddaras,  Pravalachandrodaya, Ekotharavrudhimahalakshmivilasarasa, Talisadi Churna, Sithopaladhi Churna and Lakshmivilasarasa.
To treat ‘Vataja Kasa’ (most common dry cough) the following treatment plan is followed:
? Application of oils and/or heat to the prana vaha srota (respiratory system). Eg. Sesame oil massaged into the chest followed by fomentation.
? Ghrita (medicated ghee) administration. Ghee is prepared using warm or moist expectorant herbs: Kantakari, vasaka, licorice and wild cherry bark.
? For the digestive system anuvasana basti (oil enema) or niruha basti (decoction enema) is done.
? Prescription of Sitopaladi Churna. It is a combination of many herbs and spices with chief herb being Vamsa rochana.



Flush the toxins and reboot yourself:
1. The Detoxification process in Ayurveda
2. Panchakarmas of Ayurveda
Ayurveda is one of the world's oldest holistic healing systems, originated about 3000 years ago in India. Ayurveda is not simply a healing system, but it is a way of life. The essence of Ayurveda is to keep the delicate balance between the body, mind and soul. Its purpose is to find the true balance of life by bringing adequate change in our diet and lifestyle.
The Detoxification process in Ayurveda
The primary aim of Ayurveda is to maintain the health of healthy people and to cure the diseases of sick people. Principally it comprises of 2 parts – cleansing therapy and pacifying therapy. When the toxins of the body causing diseases are in lesser quantity, pacifying medicines are given both internally and externally. Cleansing therapy which include the Panchakarmas of Ayurveda are used when the toxins are in greater quantity, thus draining them out from the body through the natural orifices.
Panchakarmas of Ayurveda
Panchakarma includes specially designed five procedures of internal purification and detoxification of the body through the nearest possible route. Such purification allows the biological system to return to homeostasis and to rejuvenate rapidly and also facilitates the desired pharmaco-therapeutic effects of medicines administered thereafter. As a treatment procedure, Panchakarma has different roles - application in the treatment of disease, as preparatory measures before surgery in Ayurveda, before administration of Rasayana and Vajikarana therapy etc.
But today, Panchakarma expounded in Ayurveda is perhaps the most misunderstood of all Ayurveda practices. Due to ignorance, it is often perceived as just another system of oil massage.
Panchakarma is not only good for alleviating the disease but is also a useful modality of treatment in preserving and promoting the perfect health. Panchakarma with wider range of therapeutical effects will pave way to nourishment of tissues, rejuvenation, increasing virility etc.
In today's busy world more and more people are becoming victims of the adverse effects of stress and anxiety, which is leading to diseases like gastro-intestinal disorders, lack of sleep, allergies, heart diseases, diabetes, cancer, osteoporosis, chronic fatigue etc. These diseases caused mainly due to deep seated metabolic toxins. Panchakarma eliminates these metabolic toxins from the body allowing permanent healing of tissues and channels. Panchakarma well known as detoxification and rejuvenation therapy, helps to eliminate the disease causing toxins and revitalizes the tissues. Panchakarma has a full therapy role as preventive and curative procedure.
Panchakarma is to be performed by professionally qualified and experienced therapists under the guidance of proficient and specialist doctors. Appropriate clinical examination of the patients is to be varried out and the treatment protocol is to be planned by the doctors after considering the physical and mental health of each individual.

